# Withheld tribunal reasoning — [2025] UKFTT 1529 (GRC)
# Gold-labelling material; NEVER include in a prompt.

== Consideration ==
40. It is common ground that there is public interest in disclosure. Like the Commissioner, we consider that proving or disproving Airwars’ more direct allegations or suspicions is a matter of public importance. The importance of avoiding the death of civilians in military operations can hardly be overstated, and assessment of incidents such as that of 26 March 2018 an obvious means to achieve it. We need not repeat all Airwars’ arguments to that effect. We also consider that the public interest in disclosure is increased by the lack of publicly available information on how such incidents are assessed in general.

41. Before turning to the public interest in maintaining the exemptions, we set out our assessment of other points put forward by Airwars: a. The MOD’s evidence does not engage with many aspects of Airwars’ case. For example, Airwars criticises Ms Costelloe's witness statement for containing no response to its scepticism that there has only been one civilian death from UK-conducted strikes. This criticism is misplaced. The only obligation upon the MOD is to provide evidence necessary to support its own case on the issues before the Tribunal. In any event, the lack of a response to any particular point means that (in evidential terms at least) there is nothing to gainsay it, so Airwars is not disadvantaged. b. We should record Mr Oliver's evidence on the procedures used to assess civilian casualties. When questioned as to the forms used, whether there is a standard written procedure where it could be found, and other matters, he had to concede that he had insufficient familiarity with the procedure to answer them. Airwars criticised him for this but the specificity of the questions was somewhat unheralded and his seniority gives him a wider purview than the detail of individual written procedures. There was also a significant amount of information he did provide. For example, in oral evidence in closed session he set out the command structure and operational details of the airstrike in question, including how this affected the misreporting between UK military forces and the Coalition and how it contributed to the late disclosure of additional responsive material. We were satisfied that he was entirely candid and forthcoming about those matters. c. As to the interests of family members of the civilian killed in the strike: i. In principle we agree with Airwars and disagree with the respondents. The ability of bereaved family members to access information about such incidents and how they occurred is a matter of general public interest. The information sought by Airwars, relating as it does to how harm is assessed, supports that public interest. The public can have confidence that victims have a reasonable opportunity to seek answers and accountability for civilian casualties. ii. We further agree with Airwars’ submission that transparency may avoid misidentification of civilian casualties as combatants by third parties, who then might pursue reprisals against their families. Likewise, effective identification and investigation of civilian casualties will enable family support. iii. Insofar as the MOD put forward an argument that the availability of claims for civil damages can meaningfully reduce the weight carried by the above points, we unhesitatingly reject it. d. Considering the evidence overall, we do accept that there is a lack of publicly available information on the procedure usually followed in assessing civilian harm, and that the nature, comprehensiveness and robustness of such a procedure is a matter of public interest. The absence of any published procedure at all has the potential to undermine public confidence as to its integrity and comprehensiveness; while there is no reason to doubt the good faith and competence of everyone involved, high level assurances do not provide the same confidence as a published procedure that can be scrutinised. That lack of open information correspondingly increases the public interest in disclosing information concerning how civilian harm was assessed in this particular strike. We apply that conclusion to our consideration, while recognising that the present request was for the documents assessing harm in this incident rather than for any documents held by the MOD for the purpose of assessing such incidents in general.

Assessing the exemptions

Sections 23 & 24

42. Section 23 provides that any information held by a public authority is exempt information if it was directly or indirectly supplied to the public authority by, or relates to, any of the bodies specified in subsection (3).

43. In Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis v Information Commissioner & Rosenbaum (Information rights - Freedom of information - qualified exemptions) [2021] UKUT 5 (AAC) , at [35], the Upper Tribunal set out fourteen principles arising from the Act and previous authority. We set them out in full (details of the authorities cited can be found earlier in the Upper Tribunal's decision): 1. Section 23 affords the "widest protection" of any of the exemptions: Cobain at [19(b)] and [29]. 2. The purpose of section 23 is to preserve the operational secrecy necessary for section 23(3) bodies to function: Lownie at [50]. 3. It is "Parliament's clear intention that, because of what they do, there should be no question of using FOIA to obtain information from or about the activities of section 23 bodies at all". The exclusion of the section 23(3) bodies from the scope of FOIA was shutting the front door, and section 23 was "a means of shutting the back door to ensure that this exclusion was not circumvented": APPGER at [16]. 4. The legislative choice of Parliament was that "the exclusionary principle was so fundamental when considering information touching the specified bodies, that even perfectly harmless disclosure would only be made on the initiative or with the consent of the body concerned": Cobain at [28]; Lownie at [53]. 5. Asking whether the information requested is anodyne or revelatory fails to respect the difficulty of identifying what the revelatory nature of the information might be without a detailed understanding of the security context: Lownie at [42]; Corderoy at [59]. 6. When applying the 'relates to' limb of sections 23(1) and (5) , that language is used in "a wide sense": APPGER at [25]; Corderoy at [59] ; Savic at [40]. 7. The first port of call should always be the statutory language without any judicial gloss: APPGER at [23]; Corderoy at [51]; Savic at [40]. 8. With that warning in mind, in the context of 'relates to' in section 23 , it may sometimes be helpful to consider the synonyms of "some connection", or "that it touches or stands in some relation to" ( APPGER at [13], [25]) or to consider whether the request is for "information, in a record supplied to one or more of the section 23 bodies, which was for the purpose of the discharge of their statutory functions" ( APPGER at [21], [26]; Lownie at [57]). But the 'relates to' limb must not be read as subject to a test of focus ( APPGER at [14) or directness ( Lownie at [59]- [60]). 9. The scope of the 'relates to' limb is not unlimited and there will come a point when any connection between the information and the section 23(3) body is too remote. Assessing this is a question of judgment on the evidence: Lownie at [62]. 10. The assessment of the degree of relationship may be informed by the context of the information: Lownie at [4] and [67]. 11. The scope of the section 23 exemption is not to be construed or applied by reference to other exemptions, including section 24 : APPGER at [17]; Lownie at [45] and [52]. 12. In a section 23(1) case, regard should be had as to whether or not information can be disaggregated from the exempt information so as to render it non-exempt and still be provided in an intelligible form: Corderoy at [43]. 13. Section 23(5) requires consideration of whether answering 'yes' or 'no' to whether the information requested is held engages any of the limbs of section 23 : Savic at [43], [82] and [92]. 14. The purpose of section 23(5) is a protective concept, to stop inferences being drawn on the existence or types of information and enables an equivalent position to be taken on other occasions: Savic at [60].

44. It is an absolute exemption. Information to which it applies is exempt from the duty of disclosure whether or not any possible prejudice could arise from its disclosure. In enacting the exemption, Parliament intended to exclude all the listed security bodies and their activities from the duty at section l of the Act .

45. Section 24(1) provides that information which does not fall within s.23(l) is exempt information if exemption is reasonably required for the purpose of safeguarding national security.

46. In approaching the exemption at s.24(1), the Upper Tribunal in Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office v Information Commissioner, Williams and Others (Sections 23 and 24) (Information rights - Freedom of information - absolute exemptions, Information rights) [2021] UKUT 248 approved six principles. We summarise them as follows: (1) The term national security has been interpreted broadly and encompasses the security of the United Kingdom and its people, the protection of democracy and the legal and constitutional systems of the state. (2) A threat to national security may be direct (the threat of action against the United Kingdom) or indirect. (3) Section 24 is not engaged, unlike the majority of the qualified exemptions, by a consideration of prejudice. Its engagement is deliberately differently worded. (4) The term "required" means "reasonably necessary". (5) National security is a matter of vital national importance in which the Tribunal should pause and reflect very carefully before overriding the sincerely held views of relevant public authorities. (6) Even where the chance of a particular harm occurring is relatively low, the seriousness of the consequences (the nature of the risk) can nonetheless mean that the public interest in avoiding that risk is very strong. The reality is that the public interest in maintaining the qualified national security exemption in section 24(1) is likely to be substantial and to require a compelling competing public interest to equal or outweigh it. That does not mean that the section 24 exemption carries "inherent weight", but is rather a reflection of what is likely to be a fair recognition of the public interests involved in the particular circumstances of a case in which section 24 is properly engaged.

47. As recognised by the final point, the exemption will only apply if the public interest in withholding the information outweighs the public interest in its disclosure.

48. We confirm that, if and where relevant, we have paid heed to Airwars' submissions that the ‘related to’ limb at section 23(1) should not be stretched too far. We also note Mr Perry's reference to APPGER v Information Commissioner and Foreign & Commonwealth Office [2015] UKUT 377 (AAC) at [20], where it is observed that the inclusion of a section 23 body in the wider distribution of a particular document is exempt, but that exemption does not then automatically extend to the content of the document itself.

49. Airwars asks us to draw an inference from the MOD's late reliance on section 23 that it is unlikely to be engaged. The Commissioner is “sympathetic” to this submission having been made, without saying whether or not it is well-founded, and reassures Airwars that reliance on sections 23 and 24 in the alternative will be “thoroughly and robustly tested in closed, including the reasons for late reliance”. We echo these observations. Late reliance on “masking” is apt to reduce confidence in its use by public authorities, and accordingly its utility. Whether or not it does so in this specific appeal, for reasons that can only be given in closed we find that masking is justified.

50. In relation to both exemptions, so far as relevant, we have carefully considered whether any information can properly be disaggregated.

51. We find that either section 23(1) or section 24(1) is engaged in relation to all information save for that which we have found should be disclosed, and that the MOD is entitled to mask which of them does. Nothing in these open reasons should be taken as any indication that either exemption applies to a particular piece of information, or indeed any of the information. To reinforce this point, it may be the case that some information engages section 23 and some information engages section 24, or that either one of them applies to all of it.

52. What can be said openly is that if any or all information does not engage section 23(1), we have conscientiously, independently and critically examined both whether section 24(1) is engaged and the strength of the public interest engaged.

53. The MOD’s open arguments on those matters incorporate their case on section 26. Those are set out below. We are mindful that while many adverse consequences to disclosure could engage both exemptions, some will not. In its internal review of its response to the request, the MOD stated: 9. However, against release, you were advised that release would prejudice the safeguarding of national security if sensitive operational details were revealed, including the tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) of relevant organisations contributing to national security. It is likely that release of the information would impact on the UK’s national security objectives.

54. It further stated in its response to the appeal: 46. In the event that s.24(1) FOIA were to apply in respect of the Responsive Information or any of it, it is a qualified exemption. In those circumstances: a. For the reasons advanced at §9 of the internal review dated 9 June 2021, it is likely that disclosure of the Responsive Information would negatively impact on the UK’s national security objectives. b. Further to paragraph 8 above, the Responsive Information reveals specific intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance techniques used by the UK Government in order to plan and conduct counter-terrorism operations. Should this information become public, it would give known and suspected terrorists damaging insight into how the UK and its allies plan operations to protect national security and could be used by them to negate the tactics and methods used in UK operations. This would likely prejudice the effectiveness of future counter-terrorism operations, reducing the UK Government’s ability to uphold national security. Counter-Daesh operations remain the UK’s top counter-terrorism priority. c. The seriousness of the consequences of adversaries obtaining any or any improved understanding of TTPs means that the public interest in avoiding that risk is very strong.

55. Airwars does not dispute that such consequences would, if established, engage section 24(1), nor does it disagree that the public interest in maintaining the exemption would be very high in those circumstances. It does repeat its submissions on section 26 (considered below). We also take due account of the parties’ submissions on the distinction between the two exemptions .

56. Insofar as section 24(1) may arise, and subject to any possible disaggregation, we are satisfied that disclosure would engage the exemption. Beyond stating our general agreement with the MOD ? s submissions on the prejudice disclosure would cause, and referring to the relevant authorities, we can give no further open reasons.

Sections 26 & 27

57. These should be taken together, given the degree of interrelationship between the prejudices claimed by the MOD under each; the relevant context in this appeal is that this particular defence function is performed in coalition with allied states. We agree with the MOD that it has consistently claimed that both exemptions arise in relation to all the information in scope of the request.

58. In Cole v ICO and MOD EA/2013/0042, this Tribunal held as follows: 53. The public interest in maintaining the exemption in section 26(1)(b) is exceptionally weighty. There is an exceptionally strong public interest in preventing harm to the UK’s capabilities in an ongoing armed conflict. The security and safety implications carry very strong public interest weight. 54. We agree with the Commissioner that there would need to be very weighty countervailing considerations to outweigh a risk to security and safety of the forces which was of sufficient severity to have engaged section 26(1)(b). While not bound by that authority, we agree with it.

59. In R. (Mohamed) v Secretary of State for Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs [2010] EWCA Civ 65 at [131], the Master of the Rolls held: ... In practical terms, the Foreign Secretary has unrestricted access to full and open advice from his experienced advisers, both in the Foreign Office and the intelligence services. He is accordingly far better informed, as well as having more relevant experience, than any judge, for the purpose of assessing the likely attitude and actions of foreign intelligence services as a result of the publication of the redacted paragraphs, and the consequences of any such actions so far as the prevention of terrorism in this country is concerned...

60. With appropriate adaptation, the above principles apply with full force to the Ministry of Defence and its assessment of how disclosure could cause the prejudice described in both section 26 and section 27.

61. We also agree with what was said in Plowden v Information Commissioner & Foreign and Commonwealth Office (EA/2011/0225) at [19], being that one way in which prejudice will arise is if disclosure “makes relations more difficult or calls for a particular diplomatic response to contain or limit damage which would not otherwise have been necessary”.

62. In some circumstances prejudice may arise even where the foreign state’s reaction is uncertain or unpredictable, the risk of harm can itself stand as the prejudice required by the exemptions.

63. We introduce the MOD’s factual case on section 26 by setting out how it was distilled in Mr Kosmin's skeleton argument: a. Operation Shader is the UK operational name for the UK’s contribution to the US-led military campaign against Daesh. The UK have been participating in operations within Iraq and Syria under Operation Shader since 2014. UK Armed Forces and the UK’s coalition allies continue to conduct such operations. b. Reapers are airframes used by the Royal Air Force. The Reaper platform is a Remotely Piloted Air System (“RPAS”). c. The Reaper platform is a strategic asset that fulfils a number of different missions for the UK military. Its use as a surveillance and reconnaissance asset, as well as strike asset, is well documented in the public domain. d. All MOD kinetic engagements, including with Reaper, must be compliant with the Laws of Armed Conflict (“LOAC”). One of the pillars of LOAC is that parties to an armed conflict must at all times distinguish between combatants and non-combatants. All UK Reaper crews receive rigorous training and repeated assessment on their understanding of LOAC. Before conducting an engagement, it is a requirement to establish positive identification of the target as a combatant. Individuals are assumed to be non-combatants unless positively identified to the contrary. The MOD has confirmed the existence of these processes through the publicly available LOAC manual ‘JSP383’. The methodologies employed to positively identify a combatant are necessarily classified to avoid prejudicing the effectiveness of UK operations: OPEN Costelloe W/S §6.c.iii. e. While Operation Shader is a counter-Daesh operation, other and/or future operations may depend on a greater degree of public uncertainty as to the employment of Reaper in order to be successful. It is therefore important to retain a degree of ambiguity regarding the tactics, techniques and procedures deployed in RPAS operations in order to maintain this flexibility in the future. f. By making the Responsive Information public, the effectiveness of the Reaper platform as an important counter-terrorism asset would be prejudiced. g. Small amounts of information, which do not of themselves appear to be particularly damaging (and might even appear anodyne), can be combined by adversaries with other sources and information held by them. The mosaic effect, as a result of the requested information being combined with other information, poses both a short term and long term risk to the protection of UK forces and forces cooperating with UK forces. The MOD regards the overall impact of the mosaic effect to be against the public interest. h. Through both information publicly available about the UK’s input to Operation Shader and other capacities available to adversaries, it is highly likely that some adversaries have a general understanding of Reaper’s operating profile. For those adversaries currently without a complex understanding of Reaper, the additional information requested by way of the Information Request could result in a significant improvement in the accuracy of, and confidence in, their understanding and assessment of UK operational capabilities and the policy restrictions on its use by UK Armed Forces. i. The harm caused by adversaries combining information regarding Reaper falls to be understood in the following context. Future employments of Reaper and similar capabilities will be affected by adversaries’ understanding of Reaper operations. The utility of Reaper and similar capabilities is in part dependent on the adversaries’ uncertainty of both the capabilities and how the UK employs them. The Responsive Information will allow a sophisticated adversary to improve its understanding of the capabilities of the platform and the UK’s Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (“TTPs”) used in the conduct of counter-terrorism operations. The Responsive Information will also increase adversaries’ understanding of the methods employed by UK forces to avoid civilian casualties. Significantly, a sophisticated adversary’s improved understanding might enable it to take steps to develop countermeasures. For less sophisticated adversaries, additional information may provide a step change in their understanding and ability to limit their exposure to the UK’s RPAS operations. This has the potential to limit the operational effectiveness of Reaper and the ability of the UK to use this asset for conducting successful strikes against highly dangerous terrorists posing a threat to UK national security and UK and allies’ security interests overseas. j. The MOD recognises that the Secretary of State for Defence made a statement to Parliament on 2 May 2018 in respect of the Strike (“the Statement”). Inter alia, the Statement provided: “… There are limits on any further details that can be provided given ongoing operations and consequent national security issues. …” That restriction was consistent with the stance the MOD has adopted in response to the Information Request (c.f. ASA §§36-37). See further OPEN Costelloe W/S §9. k. At OPEN Costelloe W/S §10, Ms Costelloe confirmed that: (i) the Strike was conducted within the framework of the Coalition; (ii) the Strike did not feature in the statistics provided by the MOD in response to an information request dated 16 February 2022 due to an administrative error; and (iii) “The Strike was not “an off-books strike, or even an extra-judicial killing”.” [OB/E910] l. The emphasis placed on the administrative error at ASA §35 and 85(3) is unwarranted: (i) the suggestion that a wider public interest in disclosure arises from the identification and later correction of an administrative error by the MOD is significantly overstated; (ii) the Appellant’s assertion that any systemic “carelessness on the MoD’s part in relation to records of civilian harm” is demonstrated by the identification and correction of this single error is without foundation; and (iii) that the administrative error was candidly accepted exemplifies the MOD acting transparently when exemptions under FOIA do not apply (c.f. ASA §64, final sentence). However, on the facts of this appeal, exemptions apply to all the Responsive Information.

64. This is supported by Ms Costelloe's witness statement: Section 26(1)(b): Defence 21. The information requested by Mr Dyke relates to an air strike conducted by UK forces in Syria on 26 March 2018. The strike was conducted using a remotely piloted air system known as Reaper. Reaper is a sensitive military capability used for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and kinetic strikes. Crucial to these activities is the ability of the MOD to limit the amount of public knowledge about how UK Armed Forces personnel and others operate Reaper, to avoid prejudicing its effectiveness. 22. Given the nuances in the way Reaper is operated, the details and signature of its operations are of significant interest for hostile actors, including terrorists. This is because the release of any information that confirms previously released information, or provides a new insight, about how the UK uses Reaper would assist hostile actors in developing counter-measures or changing their behaviour to undermine its use or to increase the risk to UK and allied service personnel. 23. The requested information would reveal sensitive operational details, including tactics, techniques and procedures about how UK forces identify, track, and target known terrorists. Of specific relevance to this request is how UK personnel employ tactics to try to avoid civilian casualties. If these were made public, suspected terrorists could adjust how they operate to better protect themselves and reduce the effectiveness of Reaper as a counter-terrorism asset. More detail will be provided in my CLOSED witness statement. 24. Through both information publicly available about the UK’s input to Operation Shader and other capacities available to adversaries, it is highly likely that some adversaries, including Daesh fighters, have a general understanding of Reaper’s operational profile. For those adversaries without a complex understanding of Reaper, the additional information requested could result in a significant improvement in the accuracy of, and confidence in, their understanding and assessment of UK operational capabilities and the policy restrictions on its use by UK Armed Forces. Section 27(1)(a): International relations 25. In my knowledge and experience of working in an international diplomacy and policy environment, I can confirm that the relationships the UK has with partners, including members of the Global Coalition against Daesh, are built on trust. Our allies and partners have a general understanding that information relating to military or security activities are handled in a confidential and a secure manner. Any loss of trust between the UK Government and international partners brought about by publicly releasing classified information shared in confidence would likely negatively impact the UK’s ability to work together closely on current and future shared defence and security objectives. 26. Operation Shader is (and was on 7 April 2021) an ongoing operation and the risk of damaging the partnerships needed to support UK operations is a real one, not hypothetical. The lack of public messaging is essential in maintaining our close collaboration with the other Coalition partners. That close collaboration, including on the command and control architecture used for Reaper, enables the RAF to use its mission-qualified Reaper crews to maximum operational advantage and efficiency. Armed Reapers are also used by the United States’ military and disclosing sensitive details about how they operate may also impact their forces’ ability to use Reaper against terrorists. Doing so could therefore impact the US-UK relationship, which underpins a large amount of UK national security and defence cooperation. I will discuss in more detail the specific relationships that could be impacted by releasing the requested information in my CLOSED statement. 27. Even outside of counter-terrorism operations in Syria and Iraq, other allies may be less likely to work alongside and support the UK in the future if they believed that classified information shared in confidence may later be released to the public. In my time overseeing operational policy in the MOD, there have been other real examples, the details of which cannot be discussed in OPEN, where unauthorised disclosure of sensitive information has led to some negative impacts for the UK ‘s relationships with other states. 28. In order to maintain the positive relations with our international allies and partners on which our Reaper operations frequently depend, we must safeguard our reputation as a trustworthy partner. It is also important to maintain a reputation for trustworthiness to enable us to operate with other allies in the future. The MOD has therefore always been careful to minimise public statements on Reaper operations in order to protect those relationships.

65. In Mr Oliver's closed evidence, he set out specific features of Reaper operations, both in general and in this particular incident, that would diminish their utility and capability if disclosed. This included specific examples of likely adaptations of enemy tactics in the event of disclosure.

66. We accept this evidence and argument as establishing the exemption in principle, and (subject to it being relevant in the case of particular information, as discussed below) find that disclosure would prejudice defence and the capability, effectiveness and security of UK armed forces and cooperating allied forces.

67. As to section 27, in its internal review the MOD stated: 16. It is recognised that the release of the requested would help inform public debate about the way that the UK conducts operations in conjunction with allied forces. However, you were advised that the relationship that UK Armed Forces have with its partners in the global coalition against Daesh are built on trust; and a general understanding that information relating to military or security activities conducted under that partnership are handled in a confidential and secure manner. Any loss of trust between the UK Government and international partners, or any other allied or partner nation, would negatively impact upon the UK’s ability to work together closely on current and future shared defence and security objectives, such as Counter Terrorism and regional stability. 17. It has been assessed that the release of the information in scope of your request would harm relations between the United Kingdom and any other state. This could inhibit the willingness of the other nations to participate or share information about the deployment of these assets in the future. Unwillingness to share intelligence or data may also impact on current and future operations, Therefore, I find that the balance of public interest lies in favour of withholding the information under section 27(1) (a) of the Act .

68. In response to a number of points made in Airwars’ Grounds of Appeal, its Response stated: b. A specific UK Government relationship that could be negatively affected by releasing the Responsive Information is that with the Government of Iraq. The legal basis for the Coalition’s operations in Syria and Iraq is the collective defence of Iraq, at the request of the Iraqi Government. Releasing the Responsive Information would place in the public domain greater detail concerning the nature of the UK’s military support to Iraq, which could risk damaging the relationship of the UK Government and the Iraqi Government and in turn the UK’s ability to conduct counter-terrorism operations in the region in the future. Further details of the specific relationships that could be negatively impacted by releasing the Responsive Information will be addressed in the MOD’s CLOSED evidence. c. Further, UK counter-terrorism operations in Syria and Iraq are conducted as part of the global coalition against Daesh. Contrary to the Appellant’s submissions, the support the UK receives on these operations from coalition partners is based on trust and an understanding that confidential and classified information will remain as such. Crucial enablers to UK counter-terrorism operations such as intelligence sharing, partnered operations, and use of coalition assets are all based on trust, and an understanding that specific information relating to national security techniques and capabilities will not be released in public. Therefore releasing the Responsive Information into the public domain could prejudice this trust and the relationships that are built upon it. Compromise of these relationships would also significantly diminish the UK Armed Forces’ ability to successfully conduct counter-terrorism operations in the future, which also goes to the application of s.26(1)(b) FOIA. d. Even outside the context of counter-terrorism operations in Syria and Iraq conducted as part of the global coalition against Daesh, other allies may be less likely to work alongside and support UK Armed Forces if they believed that classified information shared in confidence may later be released to the public.

69. In relation to both countries, Mr Oliver gave further evidence in closed. He accepted that harm to international relations was likely to be reduced in the case of an airstrike that had already been declared, but argued that in his experience it was unlikely to be mitigated by countries’ own practices as regards disclosure of information.

70. On the evidence, we find sections 26 and 27 to be engaged.

71. On the extent to which disclosure would prejudice the interests described in sections 26 and 27, and accordingly the balance of the public interest, our conclusions on two other points made by the parties are as follows: a. Parallel disclosure i. Airwars argues that prejudice to defence can hardly arise from disclosure of information (or types of information) that has already been released in far greater volumes by other states such as the USA. While acknowledging the MOD’s point on differing FOIA regimes, we agree with Airwars that the revelatory consequences of disclosure will often be lesser if identical or similar disclosed material has already been disclosed elsewhere. ii. In particular, if (for example in the Khan / New York Times disclosures) material originating from the UK government has been released by the USA, in some cases release of that same information by the UK will have little or no revelatory consequence. iii. The MOD is nonetheless right to argue that the opposite may also sometimes be the case: information revealed twice may strengthen its provenance, and additional nuances in the second disclosure, whether in formatting, timing, context or the like, may tell an adversary something of use. This must be assessed on a case-by-case basis, and the Tribunal expects some sort of rational possibility of that occurring to be demonstrated. There is also the ‘jigsaw’ effect, but again this must not be too casually invoked; it will only weigh in favour of withholding requested information where there is a reason to rationally suppose that a risk may exist. iv. We have approached this issue in light of what is said above, and our resulting consideration of the withheld information cannot be set out openly. It is nonetheless proper to record, as a very broad characterisation, that while the MOD’s concerns over revelatory consequences do have some justification, in some cases they do arise from a blanket assumption that serious consequences might flow from parallel disclosure. b. Relevance to the exemptions i. Airwars argues that some documents likely to fall in scope of the request cannot rationally engage the exemptions: (1) The simple fact of whether the strike caused civilian injuries (as well as the single recorded fatality); (2) Most importantly, the terms of reference and procedure followed for any assessment of civilian harm caused by the March 2018 Strike, including the standard of proof applied,14 the government/military bodies involved (e.g. whether there is any ministerial involvement), the involvement of Coalition partners in any investigation, the existence of independent oversight or other safeguards, and the position(s) held by the final decision maker(s); (3) Certain conclusions reached in the course of any investigation, such as whether internal operational failures (such as failure to follow a given procedure or cultural blind spots) contributed to the civilian death; and (4) Whether the MoD considered the safety and wellbeing of the family members of the civilian killed following the strike (in particular on risks that they would incorrectly be associated with IS). ii. The MOD highlights the speculative nature of that argument in what we consider to be rather uncharitable terms. It is entirely proper (and indeed often necessary) for a requester to speculate what information may be in scope, and to make hypothetical submissions in case it is right. We also reject the MOD s assertion that matters such as those described above should have been particularised in the request if Airwars expected them to be disaggregated. It is for the public authority to identify where partial disclosure can be made in response to a request. We have fully undertaken that task in our own consideration. c. Confidentiality i. Mr Perry rightly observed that the MOD has never sought to rely on section 27(2) , which exempts information “if it is confidential information obtained from a State”. We agree that section 27(2) does not fall to be considered, and the mere fact that information is confidential does not provide an absolute answer to section 27(1) . ii. We nonetheless reject that the existence of section 27(2) informs our approach to section 27(1) . The purpose of section 27(2) is to confer exemption on information received in confidence from another state without any need to show that harm to international relations would result from its disclosure (of course, the absence of such harm might still be relevant to the public interest balancing test). Under section 27(1) , confidentiality is simply a potential aspect of the factual matrix considered when assessing prejudice to international relations.

72. We address the submissions made in relation to particular countries as follows: a. The United States of America and the coalition i. Airwars argues the coalition partners are mature democracies with respect for the rule of law and with their own Freedom of Information regimes. They will expect that from time to time a body independent of the government may order disclosure of information, so it is less likely to harm diplomatic relations. This is starkly illustrated by the wide-ranging Khan / NYT disclosures, ordered under Freedom of Information legislation. The USA is unlikely, argues Airwars, to take offence at the same happening here but on a more limited basis. ii. We agree that, in general and with all else being equal, a country with its own tradition of government transparency is less likely to be concerned at its operation here. b. Iraq Iraq does not have a tradition of government transparency, so accordingly may have less sympathy with disclosure. While no one sought to disagree with that characterisation, in fairness it should be qualified as an assumption rather than based on any evidence provided to us. We accept Airwars’ argument that Iraq would still understand that it was dealing with a country that does have a Freedom of Information regime, and would (or should) have appreciated that there is always a risk that information will be disclosed. Moreover, the public interest in maintaining the exemption may be reduced if the effect is to impose the other state’s political norms on the UK.

Section 42

73. Section 42(1) provides that information in respect of which a claim to legal professional privilege or, in Scotland, to confidentiality of communications could be maintained in legal proceedings is exempt information. This includes legal advice privilege, which attaches to all communications passing between a client and its lawyers, acting in their professional capacity, in connection with the provision of advice which "relates to the rights, liabilities, obligations or remedies of the client either under private law or under public law": Three Rivers (No 6) [2005] 1 AC 610 . Such advice must nonetheless be the "dominant" purpose of the document or relevant information. As explained in Jet2 v Civil Aviation Authority [2020] EWCA Civ 35 at [93], privilege cannot prevent disclosure: ...simply because the relevant material has, as simply one, minor purpose, the obtaining of legal advice, without consideration of the respective weight of purpose ... otherwise ... swathes of internal and external material could be excluded from disclosure simply because a lawyer had been copied in and asked for his legal advice as and when he considered it appropriate to give it.

74. Mr Oliver confirmed in his open evidence that MOD legal advisers are involved at all levels, down to the actual conduct of operations. Mr Kosmin argued that “it is plain on the face of [the information] that it attracts legal advice privilege”; Airwars questions whether it can really be so plain, given that engagement of section 42 was not identified by the MOD in its initial response, internal review or during the Commissioner’s investigation.

75. Two passages within the requested information were claimed by the MOD to attract legal professional privilege. Having considered the relevant material for ourselves in closed session, we agree that one plainly contains legal advice and meets the criteria above. The other simply refers to legal advice having been taken and the exemption is not engaged.

76. As with sections 24, 26 and 27, the operation of the exemption depends on the outcome of a public interest balancing test. In both DBERR v OJ Brien [2009] EWHC 164 and Callender Smith v IC and CPS [2022] UKUT 60 (AAC) , the fundamental importance of legal professional privilege to the administration of justice was held to carry significant weight in favour of maintaining the exemption.

77. The MOD argues that the usual weight in maintaining this exemption described above is further increased where, as put by Mr Kosmin, “the advice went to the conduct of the strike and the personnel who undertook the strike”. We agree. The weight carried in the public interest balancing test is otherwise informed by the matters already rehearsed.

Conclusion on the public interest balancing test

78. We carry forward all the above evidence and argument into the balancing exercise, save where we have given reasons for rejecting it. While in formal terms we have resolved the issue of timing against Airwars’ reliance on post-response events (see [15] -[17] above), on careful consideration we conclude that we would reach the same overall conclusion whichever party is right. Likewise, due to the degree of overlap between the exemption at section 24 and those at sections 26 and 27, whether or not the former is actually engaged is immaterial to the final balance.

79. One matter upon which we can be more specific is legal professional privilege. The ability to obtain frank and fully informed legal advice is vital for the UK government and its armed forces’ compliance with LOAC and their other public and private legal obligations, and assessment of civilian harm in a military operation is a context in which it carries great importance.

80. In conclusion, we reiterate that we are not concerned with determining the rights and wrongs of UK military action abroad, participation in the Coalition, the use of drones as a combat technique, or whether the UK has complied with LOAC. Nor should we be taken as making findings of fact in relation to any of the matters discussed; this is not our function, nor is it necessary to decide the issues before us. The import of the evidence is in its illustration of the issues and debate surrounding the assessment of civilian harm arising from UK drone strikes.

81. Our overall conclusion is that the entirety of the requested information is exempt. In relation to the qualified exemptions engaged, the aggregated public interest in maintaining those exemptions outweighs the public interest in disclosing the information. We recognise that the reader of this decision, having persevered through over 10,000 words describing the evidence and arguments, may still feel rather in the dark as to what we made of them. This is an unfortunate but necessary consequence of the issues engaged, and all we can do is repeat our assurances that we have given the appeal our most anxious consideration.

Signed Date:

UTJ Neville 8 December 2025

== (sitting as Judge of the First-tier Tribunal) ==
Appendix 1 - Reasons given by Judge Neville for the case management decision refusing to appoint a special advocate

1. The appellant made an application on 10 May 2023 that the Tribunal appoint a special advocate to represent the appellant’s interests closed evidence and submissions is considered. I need not set out the background or substantive issues in this case, which are already described in the documents filed by the parties. It is sufficient to observe that the MOD resists disclosure of the requested information on the basis of the exemptions at s.23, s.24(1), s.26(1)(b), 27(1)(a), s.40(2) and s.42(1) of FOIA. The first of those two exemptions are relied upon as applying in the alternative without it being disclosed which of them actually does, as discussed in Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office v Information Commissioner, Williams and others [2021] UKUT 248 (AAC) . Insofar as a balancing exercise must be conducted in relation to any of those exemptions, the appellant’s case on the public interest in disclose of the requested information is summarised at paragraph 9 of the application. It is common ground that there is significant public interest in disclosure.

2. The MOD will rely on closed evidence and submissions, and ask the Tribunal to sit in closed session in order to do so. Everyone apart from the two respondents and their representatives will be excluded from the hearing, including the appellant and his representatives.

3. The covering email to the application states that it is made with “the aim of ensuring the appeal can proceed fairly given the absence of the Information Commissioner”. This is because the Commissioner had proposed that he not be represented at the hearing. A lack of such representation, argued the appellant, would remove the basis upon which the Court of Appeal, in Browning v The Information Commissioner & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 1050 , had held that consideration of closed material is fair.

4. In response to the application I made directions asking, in brief summary, for submissions on whether any procedural unfairness would be remedied by ordering the Commissioner to be represented, whether the First-tier Tribunal has power to appoint a special advocate (or request that a Law Officer do so), and on the practicalities of the appointment. I address those issues as follows.

Should the Tribunal direct the Commissioner to attend, and would this remedy any procedural unfairness arising from a closed material procedure?

5. The Commissioner accepted that the Tribunal has the power to order him to be represented at the hearing. He nonetheless argued that this was unnecessary for a fair hearing, as the Tribunal could exercise its own independent scrutiny. Support for this could be found in the FtT case of British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection v ICO and Newcastle University EA 2010/0064 ( BUAV ), (and affirmed in Browning ): However, irrespective of the assistance of the Commissioner, the Tribunal, as a specialist tribunal, can be expected to be able, at least in some cases, to assess for itself the application of the provisions of FOIA to the closed material…the extent to which the tribunal will be in a position to do this will depend upon the particular circumstances.

6. The Commissioner reminded the Tribunal of the current pressure upon his resources, asking that it be balanced against the benefits of his attendance.

7. Both the appellant and the MOD argued that a direction should be made requiring the Information Commission to be represented, and that this would assure a fair hearing of the appeal in which the evidence and submissions in closed session can be tested appropriately. The MOD’s written submissions made 5 numbered arguments on why such a direction should be made in this particular case. Subject to one qualification, I agree with each of them. The presence of a representative for the Commissioner was central to the reasoning in Browning concerning fairness. It is particularly worth emphasising the role of the Commissioner in FOIA appeals, both as a matter of principle ( Lubicz v Information Commissioner & King's College London [2015] UKUT 555 at [51]; Browning at [33]) and practical experience ( Corderoy v Information Commissioner [2017] UKUT 495 (AAC) at [85]; Lownie v Information Commissioner & FCDO [2023] UKFTT 397 (GRC) at [56]).

8. The qualification I mention above is that Browning cannot be read as requiring the Commissioner’s presence as a fundamental pre-requisite for fairness in every case where there is closed material. For example, it is difficult to see how fair consideration of the closed material in Stephen Campbell v Information Commissioner & HM Treasury [2023] UKFTT 885 (GRC), being the exact figures put forward by the public authority as being over the s.12 cost limit, could require the Commissioner to be represented. In the present appeal however, a considerable amount of closed evidence will be considered, the public interest in disclosure is acknowledged to be significant, and the respondents argue for the s.23/s.24 ‘masking’ principle to be applied. Such issues also arose in the case of Lownie , from which the following illustrative extracts can be provided: 6. The effect, and indeed the acknowledged purpose, of reliance upon two alternative exemptions is to mask which one of them actually applies. So, Dr Lownie was not only denied the information to which he claims the law entitles him but was kept in the dark as to why. When lodging this appeal, he argued that this approach was unfair and unlawful. That argument was considered as a preliminary issue in this appeal and two other appeals together, and ultimately by the Upper Tribunal in Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office v Information Commissioner, Williams and others [2021] UKUT 248 (AAC) (we shall refer to that authority as Williams to avoid confusion with another Upper Tribunal case concerning Dr Lownie). The Upper Tribunal held that the Act does permit a public authority, in order to protect national security, to ‘mask’ the actual exemption that applies by reliance upon ss.23 and 24 in the alternative. While this practice may well put the requester at a disadvantage, the remedy lies with the Commissioner (and, on appeal, the Tribunal) taking steps to be satisfied that one of the exemptions has been properly claimed. As well as stating those matters of principle, at [58] the Upper Tribunal held that in this specific appeal the FCDO is entitled to argue both exemptions in the alternative. That preliminary issue having been decided, the appeal has returned to this Tribunal. […] 54. We have been ably assisted in relation to the applicable legal principles by all three parties. 55. As to their application to the requested information, in his complaint to the Commissioner Dr Lownie said: I cannot believe, having released so much on the Burgess & Maclean case, which is of historical importance and public interest, and almost seventy years after they fled to Russian [and with them all] dead that s.24 applies. 56. There is little else he can say, of course, because neither he nor Mr Callus have been permitted to see the files nor any of the respondents’ submissions on their contents. The input of the Commissioner in the CLOSED hearing, by way of Mr Knight’s involvement and as predicted in Browning at [33], was of assistance in ensuring that we were best able to fulfil our own independent investigatory role and take into account such points as Dr Lownie might have made if he were there. We anticipate that attendance of a representative for the Commissioner will be essential in all cases where s.23 and s.24 are argued in the alternative. 57. The remainder of the arguments made cannot be disclosed in these OPEN reasons. … 58. We have decided that all the contents of both files are exempt from disclosure on the basis of section 23(1) or section 24(1) of FOIA. None of our reasoning can be openly disclosed without compromising the ability of the FCDO to rely on the two exemptions in the alternative, so it is set out in our CLOSED reasons. We can nonetheless assure Dr Lownie that we have taken the utmost pains to ensure that this outcome is correct, and that FOIA has been correctly applied.

9. The Tribunal’s experience of the contribution that representation of the Commissioner makes towards proper scrutiny and fairness is re-emphasised, and is not limited to that appeal.

10. Whether to order representation of the Commissioner in a particular appeal will be case-sensitive, and a matter to which the parties should direct early attention. I am entirely satisfied that it is necessary in this appeal. If Campbell is at one end of the spectrum, then this appeal is at the other. I therefore direct that the Commissioner is represented at the hearing.

Does the Tribunal have the power to appoint (or request a Law Officer to appoint) a special advocate?

11. The appellant accepts that directing the Commissioner to be represented is sufficient to address his concerns so, that direction having been made, the appointment of a special advocate can be taken as no longer pursued. Applying the overriding objective, representation by the Commissioner is clearly preferable to that latter option in these circumstances. Appointment of a special advocate would have required numerous practical issues to be addressed, likely with significant cost and delay.

12. For the above reasons a decision on whether there is a power to appoint a special advocate does not strictly arise. In deference to the parties’ full and helpful submissions, I can indicate that my decision would be that the Tribunal can made such an appointment.

13. The Court of Appeal in Browning left the matter unresolved, no doubt due to its central conclusion that the closed material procedure now ordered in this appeal was sufficient, but directed itself at [1] by the absence of an “express” power of appointment in the relevant procedure rules. I drew the parties’ attention to AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 , where the Court of Appeal held where a Tribunal’s procedure rules lacked an express power to appoint a litigation friend, this was no barrier where such an appointment was required for a fair hearing. Contrary to the MOD’s submissions, there is no reason why the Tribunal’s power to regulate its own procedure would not likewise empower it to appoint a special advocate. If, as the MOD argues, the Court of Appeal did not properly identify the source of the power to appoint a litigation friend, then that is hardly a matter for this Tribunal; I am bound by the outcome that it does, and by its existence depending on the requirement for a fair hearing.

14. While the MOD is correct that appointment of a special advocate has been put on a formal statutory footing in many cases, it also acknowledges at para 23 of its submissions that other courts have identified an implied power of appointment where necessary; that they have also set a high threshold for appointment does not answer the question of jurisdiction. This Tribunal’s predecessor, the Information Tribunal, appointed a special advocate in Campaign Against the Arms Trade v IC and MOD (EA/2006/0040). There is nothing in the two Tribunals’ respective procedure rules to justify a conclusion that an express power existed in the former but not the latter, notwithstanding the MOD’s dissection of the various differences in wording between them. The 2014 procedure rules, in particular at r.5(1), are wider in scope. Finally, it is of minor persuasive relevance that the Attorney General’s guidance “A Guide to the Role of Special Advocates & the Special Advocates’ Support Office” cites Freedom of Information as an area of law where special advocates can be appointed. This reflects both the guidance’s overall treatment of the issue and that of the authorities, being that the power is implicit and arises in any adjudicative process where such a step becomes necessary for a fair hearing.

15. I need not address practicalities and funding, which would need careful attention in the context of a specific case.
